---
    layout: post
    title: "Project 3 - Dodge the Rain"
    date: 2025-05-26
    permalink: "/blog/3"
---


I wrote this a day late,
But it was roughly midnight when I finished and bed was calling so here it is the morning after.

This whole point of me doing this is to keep it short however I have so much free time at this moment, I end up spending longer on each project.

This one was quite similar yet different.

I had to figure out a few different things, I didn't encounter as many 1 hour long frustration like the previous one - I learnt my lesson.

That being said I had put this one together fairly quickly. 3 hrs 30mins.

I did quite a few new things with it:

    * Added a counting up timer
    * Made objects generate randomly and move in a direction
    * Incremented to speed of the generated objects over time.
    * Crossed over a few more public variables.
    * Made a rather interesting mapping function (albiet google helped me with this)
    * Utilized some things from my previous projects


To keep things to the point I won't recycle code in this post with stuff made from previous ones so i'll just talk about the things that are different.

{% highlight csharp %}

    float minSpeed = 3.0f;
    float maxSpeed = 30f;

    float timeStart = 0f;
    float timeEnd = 300f;

    float currentSpeed;

        void DifficultyModifier()
    {
        currentSpeed = Map(minSpeed, maxSpeed, timeStart, timeEnd, timer.timeInSeconds);
    }

    //Map function made to increase speed as time goes on,
    //limited it to be just slightly slower than the player speed, player speed being 10
    float Map(float from, float to, float from2, float to2, float value)
    {
        if (value <= from2)
        {
            return from;
        }
        else if (value >= to2)
        {
            return to;
        }
        else
        {
            return (to - from) * ((value - from2) / (to2 - from2)) + from;
        }
    }

{% endhighlight %}


This was the mapping function I put together with a little help from google by searching something like "How to have a starting number x and end number y between range 1 - 100 unity"
Somehow this came back with mapping/scaling values to a new range. Interestingly I have come across something called Linear Interpolation. but that converts two numbers into a range usually between 0 and 1. 
The more I think about it I could have done something like this. However I didn't have a clue how to make start of the game time to "0" and end of game "1".

Now thinking I probably could if I thought more about it.

Regardless.

This Map function surprisingly pretty handy. it takes two values such as the minimum speed and end speed, and then takes another two values such as the start time and finish time and converts it into a a new speed based on what time the game is currently at.

An example of this would be:

{% highlight csharp %}
    float minSpeed = 1.0f;
    float maxSpeed = 10.0f;

    //time in seconds
    timeStart = 0.0f;
    timeEnd = 100f;

    //imagine pulling this variable from your actual clock
    actualTime = 50.0f

    Debug.Log("Set speed to: " + Map(minSpeed, maxSpeed, timeStart, timeEnd, actualTime));
{% endhighlight %}

Output:
{% highlight console %}
    Set speed to: 5
{% endhighlight %}


That example probably isn't accurate as I haven't ran it, but hopefully you get the idea.

Now the timer:

{% highlight csharp %}
using TMPro;
using UnityEngine;

public class timer : MonoBehaviour
{

    [SerializeField] TMP_Text timeText;
    [SerializeField] public static float timeInSeconds = 0.0f;

    void Update()
    {
        AddTime();
    }

    void DisplayTime(float timeToDisplay)
    {
        timeToDisplay += 1f;

        float minutes = Mathf.FloorToInt(timeToDisplay / 60);
        float seconds = Mathf.FloorToInt(timeToDisplay % 60);

        timeText.text = string.Format("{0:00}:{1:00}", minutes, seconds);
    }

    void AddTime()
    {
        timeInSeconds += Time.deltaTime;
        DisplayTime(timeInSeconds);
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

If you look at the previous code for the map method, you can see i've added timer.timeInSeconds to the functions.

This timer script is what gave me that value which is just adding Time.deltaTime to it every tick. 

Time.deltaTime - I still don't fully understand how this works but all it does is it converts things to follow your own pc's clock speed so it shows the same no matter who is playing it.

The DisplayTime method coverts the time into something readable which is displayed in a UI object text box.


I created a raindrop collision script which is just basically a reverse version of the coin-collect collision script so the raindrop collides with the floor it destroys itself.

The collision with the player and raindrop. Initially I wanted to make it so it destoyed the player. but when they player got destoyed the scripts running on it where also destroyed breaking the game in some sense.

So instead I made it turn certain things off in the scripts:

{% highlight csharp %}
    void OnCollisionEnter2D(Collision2D collision)
    {
        if (collision.gameObject.tag == "raindrop")
        {
            Debug.Log("You Lose");
            gameObject.GetComponent<rainfall>().isEnabled = false;
            gameObject.GetComponent<movement>().enabled = false;
            gameObject.GetComponent<timer>().enabled = false;
            loseText.SetActive(true);

        }
    }
{% endhighlight %}

movement is stopped, timer is also stopped so you can see how long you went for without hitting anything.

rainfall was the script I made to generate the rain. but because of how I generated the rain I had to do something different.

{% highlight csharp %}

using UnityEditor;
using UnityEngine;

public class rainfall : MonoBehaviour
{
    [SerializeField] GameObject raindrop;

    GameObject genRaindrop;

    float timeInterval = 0.32f;

    public rainMovement script;

    public bool isEnabled;




    void Start()
    {
        InvokeRepeating("GenerateRainDrop", 2.0f, timeInterval);
    }

    void Update()
    {

    }

    void GenerateRainDrop()
    {

        if (!isEnabled) { return; }
        float xRangeRain = Random.Range(-8.66f, 8.63f);
        float yRangeRain = Random.Range(5.5f, 9f);
        genRaindrop = Object.Instantiate(raindrop, new Vector2(xRangeRain, yRangeRain), Quaternion.identity);

        script = genRaindrop.GetComponent<rainMovement>();
        script.isLocked = false;
    }
}

{% endhighlight %}


Created a boolean isEnabled. if returns true it returns instead of going through the rest of the code.

Also to note there is a variable isLocked which was set in the raindrops movement function. this is just so my original raindrop doesn't runaway but once a new raindrop is Instantiated the lock is removed.

That pretty much covers all the scripts I have made.

I haven't talked much about "level design" because that's something that'll come later and from I can tell level design takes time and that is not the purpose of this 100 games challenge.

Things that went wrong or that I could not finish.

The rainfall script had a major flaw. I couldn't adjust the InvokeRepeating once it was initiated. IE the methods input variables I could not change them.
Ideally as time went on in the game I wanted the player to have to dodge more raindrops but I couldn't speed it up I tried a bunch of IF statements that decreased their spawn time by 0.02 miliseconds 
but the problem was once it was running you couldn't change it.

Ideally I would need to find another alternative way to Instantiate as I couldn't put it into the Update method otherwise it would spawn a raindrop ever tick. which would either crash the computer and insta-end the game - Not Ideal.

Another Issue I came across was the collision physics. When you play it and are watching the raindrops fall. They are only suppose to move down on the Y-axis but in order to get the collision detections to work I had to give them a rigidbody component which in return if two raindrops spawn within each other they end up sliding along the X axis as well, very weird.

Alongside that when they interact with the player they get 'stuck' on top which I guess to some extent is fine as the player lost and the game isn't going to continue.

Finally to notes.

I have not truely tested myself on what I can do within a 2 hour window and how far into a project I can get. I just continue on because I've not atleast added everything in that I wanted to add in.
On that note I did stop myself and got to this point last night as there were a few little more things I would have liked to have added.

I would have liked to have added a bit more of a challenge where randomly a full row of raindrops fall and there is only a small gap to fall through and this happens at random intervals throughout the game.
perhaps even play around with different shape raindrops and even collecting things that are 'safe' to collect that creates like a score?


Next Project is going to be something different. following on from my first post it's going to be a text based choice game.


Here is the game
[Dodge the Rain][dodge-the-rain]

again to note: Aspect Ratio 16:9.

[dodge-the-rain]: /builds/project_3/Build/index.html



